# Related Books

We relate our book to five others of which the first four are closely related while the last book (The Art of Computer Programming by Donald E. Knuth) is mentioned because of its importance in the field. It can probably be found on virtually any computer scientist's book shelf.

The first three books essentially share with our book the broad target audience beyond computer science students while the fourth book (An Introduction to Computer Science: A Textbook for Beginners in Informatics by Gilbert Brands) targets, unlike us, undergraduate computer students specifically.

An interesting observation is that the titles of the first four books are perfect summaries of how our book is different. The first book (Code: The Hidden Language of Computer Hardware and Software by Charles Petzold) has a strong focus on code. The second book (But How Do It Know? - The Basic Principles of Computers for Everyone by J. Clark Scott) explains how computers work while the third book (The Elements of Computing Systems: Building a Modern Computer from First Principles by Noam Nisan and Shimon Schocken) explains how to build one. The fourth book (An Introduction to Computer Science: A Textbook for Beginners in Informatics by Gilbert Brands) is a traditional textbook for computer science students.

The idea of our book is to explain the absolute basics of computer science, not just computers, which includes how computers work and can be built in principle but goes far beyond that by focusing on the question of where the meaning of software comes from and how its universality enables computing as utility and ultimately the automation of everything. This is also different from teaching computational thinking with its focus on problem solving. Our focus is on creating a deep yet intuitive understanding of *elementary* computer science yet by emphasizing how simple rather than technical the individual basic principles of computer science really are and how powerful they become when put together.

Similar to elementary arithmetic with its five basic categories called numbers, measurement, geometry, algebra, and probabilities, we present five basic categories of elementary computer science called information, machine, programming, tools, and computing. Information is on encoding and decoding information in bits. Machine is on a simple yet representative and still realistic machine model. Programming is on fundamental programming language concepts. Tools is on translation and interpretation of programs. Computing is on virtualization for enabling computing as utility and cloud computing.

A key distinguishing factor of our book is that throughout the book we expose the reader to a key concept in computer science called self-referentiality which has immediate counterparts in the real world. For this purpose, we use a software system called selfie that we developed over many years teaching undergraduate computer science students. Selfie integrates all five categories of elementary computer science in one system and helps us clarify in systematic and well-founded fashion the meaning of software and the universality of computing which comes down to understanding how self-referentiality in its various forms is resolved. Think of an English dictionary written in English. The same can be done with software that defines its own meaning. However, in contrast to English, software is a formalism that can be executed by a computer. Seeing how self-referentiality is resolved is key to understanding elementary computer science and makes all the difference.

Code: The Hidden Language of Computer Hardware and Software by Charles Petzold

The book provides, similar to us, an introduction to computer science for broader audiences beyond computer science students and is therefore closely related to ours. The structure of the book is also somewhat similar to ours. The presentation and concept of the book are nevertheless quite different. There is a strong focus on what code is in many different forms in the first half of the book followed by a machine model and higher level concepts such as programs and operating systems in the second half of the book. This is quite different from our focus on the basic principles of computer science in general and our approach of integration through the selfie system in particular.

But How Do It Know? - The Basic Principles of Computers for Everyone by J. Clark Scott

The book provides, again similar to us, an introduction to computer science for broader audiences beyond computer science students and is therefore closely related to ours. The structure of the book is also somewhat similar to ours. The presentation and concept of the book are nevertheless again quite different. There is a strong focus on how a computer works in the first three quarters of the book followed by a much shorter treatment of higher level concepts such as programs and operating systems in the last quarter of the book. This is again quite different from our focus on elementary computer science with our use of self-referentiality as integrating concept.

The Elements of Computing Systems: Building a Modern Computer from First Principles by Noam Nisan and Shimon Schocken

The book provides, again similar to us, an introduction to computer science for broader audiences beyond computer science students and is therefore closely related to ours. The structure of the book is also somewhat similar to ours. The presentation and concept of the book are nevertheless also quite different. The idea is to show how a computer is essentially built from scratch including the software stack running on top of the machine. This is obviously again quite different from our focus on elementary computer science with our use of self-referentiality as integrating concept.

An Introduction to Computer Science: A Textbook for Beginners in Informatics by Gilbert Brands

This book provides an introduction to computer science for undergraduate students. The structure of the book is similar to ours except for additional material on networking. The presentation is nevertheless also quite different. The book targets students specifically studying computer science rather than broader audiences like us. The content of the book is therefore purely technical without setting the material into context for readers that do not intend to study computer science. The concept of the book is in that sense a classical introduction to computer science similar to many introductory classes in the field.

The Art of Computer Programming by Donald E. Knuth

This book is seminal work in multiple volumes that provides comprehensive coverage of many aspects of computer science. Structure, presentation, content, and target audience of the book are very different from ours. The book is the de-facto standard encyclopedia of computer science for readers that already have formal training in computer science.